[Music]
hurry class listen up how many
continents do you know there are in the
world seven you say well what if I told
you that in the future we might just be
a couple of continents short let's see
what our planet has in store for us I'll
start from the very beginning
well that would be the Big Bang hmm how
about 1755 yeah that year there was a
huge earthquake in Lisbon Portugal that
had catastrophic consequences the city
was almost demolished by the shaking and
pounding which ended in a massive
tsunami that finished the job after that
everything went quiet and for more than
200 years no more natural disasters
happened but then in 1969 another
earthquake shook the west of Portugal
this one milder and the country was
prepared for the shaking but still it
was considered very powerful it was then
that marine geologist Zuo Duarte started
looking at the tectonic plates beneath
Portugal he was concerned with those
earthquakes for a single reason they
were not normal but before we go into
detail here we need to understand what a
normal earthquake is exactly you see
quakes happen when two tectonic plates
meet and one of them is forced
underneath the other because of gravity
and pressure the area where this occurs
is called the subduction zone and it's
basically a fracture or a Fault in the
Earth's rocky fundament now can you
imagine a tectonic plate remember those
things in school - you know the big
pieces that make up the puzzle that is
our planet let's take one of the biggest
of them to understand the sheer size of
those things
take a world map and find North America
on it it's part of the North American
plate but not all of it
far from it in fact the plate beneath
the continent of North America spreads
to the Northeast and covers the whole of
Greenland and it's coastal waters huge
sure is but that's not all it also
stretches to the far north goes over the
Arctic and down the other side of the
world to take in parts of
Eastern Russia and Japan now that is
more than huge
it's simply ginormous and what's more
it's never really in one place the
plates are constantly on the move
floating on the planet if you will so
now that you realize the scale picture
this a plate the size of the North
American one bumps into another equally
big one say the Pacific plate and one of
those plates goes under the other along
the west coast along the famous San
Andreas Fault
since both plates are right beneath our
feet we can't help but feel their
collision that's how earthquakes form
and not only them volcanic eruptions are
also the result of tectonic movement
thus the infamous Pacific Ring of Fire
as well as mountain formations and ocean
trenches so what's so unusual about an
earthquake in Portugal then the thing is
this country is far from any tectonic
fault and the plate it sits on is flat
the chance of a quake there should be
close to zero and yet it happened twice
in just about two centuries it's like a
few seconds on a geological scale
according to what we know it's a
complete puzzle at least it was until
Joe Joe arte who I mentioned earlier
found the answer he and his team had
been monitoring the area under Portugal
for over 10 years using state-of-the-art
technology to solve this earth-shaking
riddle and finally in May 2019
Duarte published the first results of
his research and it looked like bad news
Duarte steam found that the plate they
were looking at has been undergoing the
process of serpentine ization nope that
has nothing to do with snakes it's a
natural process where the rock and the
seabed absorbs water
it literally snakes inside the cracks
and fissures in the tectonic plate and
the pressure from it makes the rock
weaker when it reaches a certain level
though the seabed basically becomes
unhinged if the cracks inside the plate
are big enough water finds a way into
each and every one of them making the
layers of the rock peel away from each
other
let me give you an example say you're
driving on a bright sunny day he just
got brand new tires so they've got a
good grip on the road but then all of a
sudden it starts raining and in a blink
of an eye it's already pouring the road
is quickly covered in a thin layer of
water and your tires start losing their
grip if you're not careful you can
easily fly off the road because the thin
film of water between your tires and the
road is actually enough to lift your
vehicle and send it hydroplaning the
same thing happens when water gets
between the layers of a tectonic plate
they have a different density so they're
naturally divided already water in its
turn separates them even further making
the top layer slide off the bottom one
given the size of the Eurasian Plate
which Portugal is part of such movement
can be compared with two tectonic plates
going one under the other and like I
said a bit earlier when this happens
earthquakes are bound to occur so
mystery solved right but what about the
peeling off of a tectonic plate what
will happen to the planet when the top
layer finally slides away
well Duarte has his own hypothesis about
that too and he was really excited to
share it in several interviews
you see when tectonic masses move around
they eventually bump into each other for
now there's a set number of those plates
and they're moving at a very slow rate
but if a new one happens to appear in
the future it'll fill in the space
between the existing plates and create
even more bumps with them it's not hard
to guess that it'll cause a lot more
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions but
that's not even the worst of it though
maybe worst is not the best word here
it's better to say most exciting the
brand-new tectonic plate will go
underneath the Atlantic Ocean and
collide with several other plates at
once it'll be pushed under some of them
and above others but the result will be
all the same
more and more subduction zones will
start appearing causing natural
disasters and the eventual disappearance
of the Atlantic Ocean itself
wait what okay here it goes
imagine you're in a bathtub made of rock
the bottom of it is solid enough and the
water is kept at the level you want
you're nice and cozy all right well
comfortable enough for someone sitting
on a bunch of rocks but then something
moves beneath you and you feel one of
the rocks in the rocky bottom shift from
its place and a big stone it is it turns
and pushes several other stones to
different sides and then you see cracks
appearing between them naturally water
from your nice warm tub starts seeping
right into the cracks leaving you in a
dry rocky bed after some time ah no more
Beth time fun you get the point right if
some newcomer shifts all the rest of the
tectonic plates it will eventually lead
to water seeping away from the Atlantic
Ocean but the process here is a bit more
complicated
the missing water will find its way to
some other place on earth
URT believes it will be the Pacific and
while the movement of the plates
continues and it will go on until
there's space for that the landscape of
our planet will continue reshaping so
one day when the new plate finally finds
a comfortable place for itself will have
a new supercontinent Orica I like your
merica better but hey they didn't ask me
in fact you might know already that our
planet hasn't always been separated into
seven continents once upon a time it was
all one huge supercontinent called
Pangaea and it was broken up exactly
because of the same geological process
tectonic movement the plates just
shifted around moved away from each
other and new continents form from
Pangaea which was simply torn apart but
the movement didn't stop so it's pretty
illogical to assume that we might get to
live on a single continent in the future
now on top of that there are several
more theories about how exactly our
planet will
come to this supercontinent thing the
most likely one for now is called novo
Pangaea today scientists believe that
the Atlantic Ocean is opening while the
Pacific on the contrary is closing
if this tendency persists then both
American continents will go join the
club with Africa and Eurasia as a result
a huge land mass will form surrounded
from all sides by a new even more
humongous ocean don't worry though this
might all sound you know really cool but
geological processes take a lot of time
and by a lot I mean millions of years
tectonic movement is a slow thing and
even if the researchers are correct you
and I won't get to see it with our own
eyes bummer and here I was hoping I
wouldn't have to make another long
uncomfortable transatlantic flight ever
again oh well so how about you would you
like to see what our planet will become
in a few million years let me know down
in the comments if you learned something
new today then give this video a like
and share it with a friend
but hey don't go moving your continents
just yet hey if you went too far would
you then be incontinent hmmm I don't
have a clue about that but I do know
that we have over 2,000 cool videos for
you to check out all you have to do is
pick the left or right video click on it
and enjoy stay on the bright side of
life
[Music]